# How to write a filter file

If you are looking for templates for filters, you can find them here:
[filter
templates](https://github.com/dlr-sc/gitlab-corpus/tree/main/filter-templates)

## Sections of the filter file

The filter file is separated into two main sections: `filters` and
`attributes`. A filter specifies **if** a project will be saved in the
output corpus. The attributes specified in the attributes section
define, which attributes of a project will be shown in the output
corpus.

The two sections are specified by writing:

    filters:

    attributes:

**Without** any indentation.

The example above is also the minimal required filter file, when using
`corpus filter` or the `corpus build` pipeline.

## How to write a filter

A filter can be written directly under the section title `filters:` with
an indentation (I always use 4 spaces or tab). Make sure to be
consistent with the indentation or your filter file might not be read.

Any attribute a project has in a corpus, can be used as a filter option.
To filter by an attribute, one has to define the operator and the value,
that will be used in the evaluation.

Here is a small example:

    filters:
        id:
            operator: "<"
            value: 12345

As we are writing a filter, we start with the keyword `filters:`. In the
next line, we write the attribute by which we want to filter the
projects. Here it is `id:`. The next two lines are for `operator` and
`value`. Any non-numeric values need to be surrounded by double quotes
(\") or single quotes (\').

Attributes with a string value can also be filtered by using a regular
expression, as shown in the following example:

    filters:
        name:
            operator: "regex"
            value: ".*machine\slearning.*"

Here we search for projects, which have the string \'machine learning\'
in its name.

## Special filter option: languages

GitLab provides the languages used in a project through its API. We can
use this, to create a corpus of projects which use specific languages
only.

Until now, there are four possible language filters:

any_languages

> A project will only be added to the corpus, it is contains any of the
> languages defined here.

atleast_languages

> A project will only be added to the corpus, if it contains at least
> the languages defined here.

atmost_languages

> A project will only be added to the corpus, if it contains at most the
> languages defined here.

exact_languages

> A project will only be added to the corpus, if it contains exactly the
> languages defined here.

Some examples can be found in the section [Examples]{.title-ref}.

## How to specify the attributes

Defining the attributes to be shown in the corpus is straight forward.
Simply add the name of the attribute in a list in the next line after
`attributes`, like so:

    attributes:
        - id
        - name
        - description
        - web_url

## How to refer to a filter file

A filter file is needed, if you either run the command `corpus build` or
`corpus filter`. The default location for a filter file is
`resources/filters.yaml` from your current directory.

If you want to specify the location of the filter file manually, add the
following to your command:

    corpus build --filter-file=path/to/your/filter_file.yaml

or:

    corpus filter --filter-file=path/to/your/filter_file.yaml

## Examples

Assume we want to create a corpus of the projects of our GitLab
instance, which currently only has two projects:

1.  Project 1, which has the following languages section:

        "C#": 52.7,
        "C++": 43.14,
        "C": 4.16

2.  Project 2, which has the following languages section:

        "HTML": 51.0,
        "Vue": 9.0,
        "JavaScript": 40.0

### Examples for any_languages

We now want to filter out projects that have any of the languages C, C++
or Java. The filter for this would look like this:

    filters:
        any_languages:
            C:
                operator: ">="
                value: 0.0
            C++:
                operator: ">="
                value: 0.0
            Java:
                operator: ">="
                value: 0.0

The resulting corpus would then contain Project 1 only. In the future it
shall be necessary anymore, to write operator and value in this case.

Now we want to filter more detailed, by projects which have the
languages C, C++ or Java with at least 60%:

    filters:
        any_languages:
            C:
                operator: ">="
                value: 60.0
            C++:
                operator: ">="
                value: 60.0
            Java:
                operator: ">="
                value: 60.0

The resulting corpus would not contain any of the two projects.

### Examples for atleast_languages

The following filter would only add Project 2 to the corpus, because
Project 1 does not contain HTML or Vue:

    filters:
        atleast_languages:
            HTML:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0
            Vue:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0

Here we filter out projects, which contain at least Vue, but it should
not make up more than 50% of the projects languages:

    filters:
        atleast_languages:
            Vue:
                operator: "<="
                value: 50.0

The corpus would then contain Project 2.

### Examples for atmost_languages

We now want to filter out projects, which only contain the programming
languages C and C++ and nothing more:

    filters:
        atmost_languages:
            C:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0
            C++:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0

None of the above projects would be added to the corpus.

If we add C#, Python and ActionScript to the filters, Project 1 will be
added to the corpus, because it contains C#, C++ and C:

    filters:
        atmost_languages:
            C:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0
            C++:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0
            C#:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0
            Python:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0
            ActionScript:
                operator: ">"
                value: 0.0

### Examples for exact_languages

We now want to filter out those projects, that contain exactly HTML, Vue
and JavaScript with at least 30%:

    filters:
        exact_languages:
            HTML:
                operator: ">"
                value: 30.0
            Vue:
                operator: ">"
                value: 30.0
            JavaScript:
                operator: ">="
                value: 30.0

The resulting corpus would contain Project 2 only.
